<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Introduction</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="introduction" epub:type="introduction">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Introduction</h2>
			
			<p >I must have been no more than fifteen or sixteen years old
			when I first chanced upon Winesburg, Ohio. Gripped by these
			stories and sketches of Sherwood Anderson's small-town
			"grotesques," I felt that he was opening for me new depths
			of experience, touching upon half-buried truths which
			nothing in my young life had prepared me for. A New York
			City boy who never saw the crops grow or spent time in the
			small towns that lay sprinkled across America, I found
			myself overwhelmed by the scenes of wasted life, wasted
			love—was this the "real" America?—that Anderson sketched
			in Winesburg. In those days only one other book seemed to
			offer so powerful a revelation, and that was Thomas Hardy's
			Jude the Obscure.</p>

			<p>Several years later, as I was about to go overseas as
			a soldier, I spent my last week-end pass on a somewhat
			quixotic journey to Clyde, Ohio, the town upon which
			Winesburg was partly modeled. Clyde looked, I suppose, not
			very different from most other American towns, and the few
			of its residents I tried to engage in talk about Anderson
			seemed quite uninterested. This indifference would not have
			surprised him; it certainly should not surprise anyone who
			reads his book.</p>

			<p>Once freed from the army, I started to write literary
			criticism, and in 1951 I published a critical biography
			of Anderson. It came shortly after Lionel Trilling's
			influential essay attacking Anderson, an attack from
			which Anderson's reputation would never quite recover.
			Trilling charged Anderson with indulging a vaporous
			sentimentalism, a kind of vague emotional meandering in
			stories that lacked social or spiritual solidity. There
			was a certain cogency in Trilling's attack, at least
			with regard to Anderson's inferior work, most of which
			he wrote after Winesburg, Ohio. In my book I tried,
			somewhat awkwardly, to bring together the kinds of
			judgment Trilling had made with my still keen affection
			for the best of Anderson's writings. By then, I had
			read writers more complex, perhaps more distinguished
			than Anderson, but his muted stories kept a firm place
			in my memories, and the book I wrote might be seen as a
			gesture of thanks for the light—a glow of darkness,
			you might say—that he had brought to me.</p>

			<p>Decades passed.  I no longer read Anderson, perhaps
			fearing I might have to surrender an admiration of
			youth. (There are some writers one should never return
			to.) But now, in the fullness of age, when asked to say
			a few introductory words about Anderson and his work, I
			have again fallen under the spell of Winesburg, Ohio,
			again responded to the half-spoken desires, the
			flickers of longing that spot its pages. Naturally, I
			now have some changes of response: a few of the stories
			no longer haunt me as once they did, but the long story
			"Godliness," which years ago I considered a failure, I
			now see as a quaintly effective account of the way
			religious fanaticism and material acquisitiveness can
			become intertwined in American experience.</p>

			<p>            *       *       *</p>

			<p>Sherwood Anderson was born in Ohio in 1876. His
			childhood and youth in Clyde, a town with perhaps three
			thousand souls, were scarred by bouts of poverty, but
			he also knew some of the pleasures of pre-industrial
			American society. The country was then experiencing
			what he would later call "a sudden and almost universal
			turning of men from the old handicrafts towards our
			modern life of machines." There were still people in
			Clyde who remembered the frontier, and like America
			itself, the town lived by a mixture of diluted
			Calvinism and a strong belief in "progress," Young
			Sherwood, known as "Jobby"—the boy always ready to
			work—showed the kind of entrepreneurial spirit that
			Clyde respected: folks expected him to become a
			"go-getter," And for a time he did. Moving to Chicago
			in his early twenties, he worked in an advertising
			agency where he proved adept at turning out copy. "I
			create nothing, I boost, I boost," he said about
			himself, even as, on the side, he was trying to write
			short stories.</p>

			<p>In 1904 Anderson married and three years later moved to
			Elyria, a town forty miles west of Cleveland, where he
			established a firm that sold paint. "I was going to be
			a rich man…. Next year a bigger house; and after
			that, presumably, a country estate." Later he would say
			about his years in Elyria, "I was a good deal of a
			Babbitt, but never completely one." Something drove him
			to write, perhaps one of those shapeless hungers—a
			need for self-expression? a wish to find a more
			authentic kind of experience?—that would become a
			recurrent motif in his fiction.</p>

			<p>And then, in 1912, occurred the great turning point in
			Anderson's life. Plainly put, he suffered a nervous
			breakdown, though in his memoirs he would elevate this
			into a moment of liberation in which he abandoned the
			sterility of commerce and turned to the rewards of
			literature. Nor was this, I believe, merely a deception
			on Anderson's part, since the breakdown painful as it
			surely was, did help precipitate a basic change in his
			life. At the age of 36, he left behind his business and
			moved to Chicago, becoming one of the rebellious
			writers and cultural bohemians in the group that has
			since come to be called the "Chicago Renaissance."
			Anderson soon adopted the posture of a free, liberated
			spirit, and like many writers of the time, he presented
			himself as a sardonic critic of American provincialism
			and materialism. It was in the freedom of the city, in
			its readiness to put up with deviant styles of life,
			that Anderson found the strength to settle accounts
			with—but also to release his affection for—the world
			of small-town America. The dream of an unconditional
			personal freedom, that hazy American version of utopia,
			would remain central throughout Anderson's life and
			work. It was an inspiration; it was a delusion.</p>

			<p>In 1916 and 1917 Anderson published two novels mostly
			written in Elyria, Windy McPherson's Son and Marching
			Men, both by now largely forgotten. They show patches
			of talent but also a crudity of thought and
			unsteadiness of language. No one reading these novels
			was likely to suppose that its author could soon
			produce anything as remarkable as Winesburg, Ohio.
			Occasionally there occurs in a writer's career a
			sudden, almost mysterious leap of talent, beyond
			explanation, perhaps beyond any need for explanation.</p>

			<p>In 1915-16 Anderson had begun to write and in 1919 he
			published the stories that comprise Winesburg, Ohio,
			stories that form, in sum, a sort of loosely-strung
			episodic novel. The book was an immediate critical
			success, and soon Anderson was being ranked as a
			significant literary figure. In 1921 the distinguished
			literary magazine The Dial awarded him its first annual
			literary prize of $2,000, the significance of which is
			perhaps best understood if one also knows that the
			second recipient was T. S. Eliot. But Anderson's moment
			of glory was brief, no more than a decade, and sadly,
			the remaining years until his death in 1940 were marked
			by a sharp decline in his literary standing. Somehow,
			except for an occasional story like the haunting "Death
			in the Woods," he was unable to repeat or surpass his
			early success. Still, about Winesburg, Ohio and a small
			number of stories like "The Egg" and "The Man Who
			Became a Woman" there has rarely been any critical
			doubt.</p>

			<p>            *       *       *</p>

			<p>No sooner did Winesburg, Ohio make its appearance than
			a number of critical labels were fixed on it: the
			revolt against the village, the espousal of sexual
			freedom, the deepening of American realism. Such tags
			may once have had their point, but by now they seem
			dated and stale. The revolt against the village (about
			which Anderson was always ambivalent) has faded into
			history. The espousal of sexual freedom would soon be
			exceeded in boldness by other writers. And as for the
			effort to place Winesburg, Ohio in a tradition of
			American realism, that now seems dubious. Only rarely
			is the object of Anderson's stories social
			verisimilitude, or the "photographing" of familiar
			appearances, in the sense, say, that one might use to
			describe a novel by Theodore Dreiser or Sinclair Lewis.
			Only occasionally, and then with a very light touch,
			does Anderson try to fill out the social arrangements
			of his imaginary town—although the fact that his
			stories are set in a mid-American place like Winesburg
			does constitute an important formative condition. You
			might even say, with only slight overstatement, that
			what Anderson is doing in Winesburg, Ohio could be
			described as "antirealistic," fictions notable less for
			precise locale and social detail than for a highly
			personal, even strange vision of American life. Narrow,
			intense, almost claustrophobic, the result is a book
			about extreme states of being, the collapse of men and
			women who have lost their psychic bearings and now
			hover, at best tolerated, at the edge of the little
			community in which they live. It would be a gross
			mistake, though not one likely to occur by now, if we
			were to take Winesburg, Ohio as a social photograph of
			"the typical small town" (whatever that might be.)
			Anderson evokes a depressed landscape in which lost
			souls wander about; they make their flitting
			appearances mostly in the darkness of night, these
			stumps and shades of humanity. This vision has its
			truth, and at its best it is a terrible if narrow
			truth—but it is itself also grotesque, with the tone
			of the authorial voice and the mode of composition
			forming muted signals of the book's content. Figures
			like Dr. Parcival, Kate Swift, and Wash Williams are
			not, nor are they meant to be, "fully-rounded"
			characters such as we can expect in realistic fiction;
			they are the shards of life, glimpsed for a moment, the
			debris of suffering and defeat. In each story one of
			them emerges, shyly or with a false assertiveness,
			trying to reach out to companionship and love, driven
			almost mad by the search for human connection. In the
			economy of Winesburg these grotesques matter less in
			their own right than as agents or symptoms of that
			"indefinable hunger" for meaning which is Anderson's
			preoccupation.</p>

			<p>Brushing against one another, passing one another in
			the streets or the fields, they see bodies and hear
			voices, but it does not really matter—they are
			disconnected, psychically lost. Is this due to the
			particular circumstances of small-town America as
			Anderson saw it at the turn of the century? Or does he
			feel that he is sketching an inescapable human
			condition which makes all of us bear the burden of
			loneliness? Alice Hindman in the story "Adventure"
			turns her face to the wall and tries "to force herself
			to face the fact that many people must live and die
			alone, even in Winesburg." Or especially in Winesburg?
			Such impressions have been put in more general terms in
			Anderson's only successful novel, Poor White:</p>

			<p style="margin-left: 2%; margin-right: 2%">  All men lead their lives behind a wall of
			  misunderstanding they have themselves built,
			  and most men die in silence and unnoticed
			  behind the walls.  Now and then a man, cut
			  off from his fellows by the peculiarities
			  of his nature, becomes absorbed in doing
			  something that is personal, useful and
			  beautiful.  Word of his activities is
			  carried over the walls.</p>

			<p>These "walls" of misunderstanding are only seldom due
			to physical deformities (Wing Biddlebaum in "Hands") or
			oppressive social arrangements (Kate Swift in "The
			Teacher.") Misunderstanding, loneliness, the inability
			to articulate, are all seen by Anderson as virtually a
			root condition, something deeply set in our natures.
			Nor are these people, the grotesques, simply to be
			pitied and dismissed; at some point in their lives they
			have known desire, have dreamt of ambition, have hoped
			for friendship. In all of them there was once something
			sweet, "like the twisted little apples that grow in the
			orchards in Winesburg." Now, broken and adrift, they
			clutch at some rigid notion or idea, a "truth" which
			turns out to bear the stamp of monomania, leaving them
			helplessly sputtering, desperate to speak out but
			unable to. Winesburg, Ohio registers the losses
			inescapable to life, and it does so with a deep
			fraternal sadness, a sympathy casting a mild glow over
			the entire book. "Words," as the American writer Paula
			Fox has said, "are nets through which all truth
			escapes." Yet what do we have but words?</p>

			<p>They want, these Winesburg grotesques, to unpack their
			hearts, to release emotions buried and festering. Wash
			Williams tries to explain his eccentricity but hardly
			can; Louise Bentley "tried to talk but could say
			nothing"; Enoch Robinson retreats to a fantasy world,
			inventing "his own people to whom he could really talk
			and to whom he explained the things he had been unable
			to explain to living people."</p>

			<p>In his own somber way, Anderson has here touched upon
			one of the great themes of American literature,
			especially Midwestern literature, in the late
			nineteenth and early twentieth centuries: the struggle
			for speech as it entails a search for the self. Perhaps
			the central Winesburg story, tracing the basic
			movements of the book, is "Paper Pills," in which the
			old Doctor Reefy sits "in his empty office close by a
			window that was covered with cobwebs," writes down some
			thoughts on slips of paper ("pyramids of truth," he
			calls them) and then stuffs them into his pockets where
			they "become round hard balls" soon to be discarded.
			What Dr. Reefy's "truths" may be we never know;
			Anderson simply persuades us that to this lonely old
			man they are utterly precious and thereby
			incommunicable, forming a kind of blurred moral
			signature.</p>

			<p>After a time the attentive reader will notice in these
			stories a recurrent pattern of theme and incident: the
			grotesques, gathering up a little courage, venture out
			into the streets of Winesburg, often in the dark, there
			to establish some initiatory relationship with George
			Willard, the young reporter who hasn't yet lived long
			enough to become a grotesque. Hesitantly, fearfully, or
			with a sputtering incoherent rage, they approach him,
			pleading that he listen to their stories in the hope
			that perhaps they can find some sort of renewal in his
			youthful voice. Upon this sensitive and fragile boy
			they pour out their desires and frustrations. Dr.
			Parcival hopes that George Willard "will write the book
			I may never get written," and for Enoch Robinson, the
			boy represents "the youthful sadness, young man's
			sadness, the sadness of a growing boy in a village at
			the year's end [which may open] the lips of the old
			man."</p>

			<p>What the grotesques really need is each other, but
			their estrangement is so extreme they cannot establish
			direct ties—they can only hope for connection through
			George Willard. The burden this places on the boy is
			more than he can bear. He listens to them attentively,
			he is sympathetic to their complaints, but finally he
			is too absorbed in his own dreams. The grotesques turn
			to him because he seems "different"—younger, more
			open, not yet hardened—but it is precisely this
			"difference" that keeps him from responding as warmly
			as they want. It is hardly the boy's fault; it is
			simply in the nature of things. For George Willard, the
			grotesques form a moment in his education; for the
			grotesques, their encounters with George Willard come
			to seem like a stamp of hopelessness.</p>

			<p>The prose Anderson employs in telling these stories may
			seem at first glance to be simple: short sentences, a
			sparse vocabulary, uncomplicated syntax. In actuality,
			Anderson developed an artful style in which, following
			Mark Twain and preceding Ernest Hemingway, he tried to
			use American speech as the base of a tensed rhythmic
			prose that has an economy and a shapeliness seldom
			found in ordinary speech or even oral narration. What
			Anderson employs here is a stylized version of the
			American language, sometimes rising to quite formal
			rhetorical patterns and sometimes sinking to a
			self-conscious mannerism. But at its best, Anderson's
			prose style in Winesburg, Ohio is a supple instrument,
			yielding that "low fine music" which he admired so much
			in the stories of Turgenev.</p>

			<p>One of the worst fates that can befall a writer is that
			of self-imitation: the effort later in life, often
			desperate, to recapture the tones and themes of
			youthful beginnings. Something of the sort happened
			with Anderson's later writings. Most critics and
			readers grew impatient with the work he did after, say,
			1927 or 1928; they felt he was constantly repeating his
			gestures of emotional "groping"—what he had called in
			Winesburg, Ohio the "indefinable hunger" that prods and
			torments people. It became the critical fashion to see
			Anderson's "gropings" as a sign of delayed adolescence,
			a failure to develop as a writer. Once he wrote a
			chilling reply to those who dismissed him in this way:
			"I don't think it matters much, all this calling a man
			a muddler, a groper, etc…. The very man who throws
			such words as these knows in his heart that he is also
			facing a wall." This remark seems to me both dignified
			and strong, yet it must be admitted that there was some
			justice in the negative responses to his later work.
			For what characterized it was not so much "groping" as
			the imitation of "groping," the self-caricature of a
			writer who feels driven back upon an earlier self that
			is, alas, no longer available.</p>

			<p>But Winesburg, Ohio remains a vital work, fresh and
			authentic. Most of its stories are composed in a minor
			key, a tone of subdued pathos—pathos marking both the
			nature and limit of Anderson's talent. (He spoke of
			himself as a "minor writer.") In a few stories,
			however, he was able to reach beyond pathos and to
			strike a tragic note. The single best story in
			Winesburg, Ohio is, I think, "The Untold Lie," in which
			the urgency of choice becomes an outer sign of a tragic
			element in the human condition. And in Anderson's
			single greatest story, "The Egg," which appeared a few
			years after Winesburg, Ohio, he succeeded in bringing
			together a surface of farce with an undertone of
			tragedy. "The Egg" is an American masterpiece.</p>

			<p>Anderson's influence upon later American writers,
			especially those who wrote short stories, has been
			enormous. Ernest Hemingway and William Faulkner both
			praised him as a writer who brought a new tremor of
			feeling, a new sense of introspectiveness to the
			American short story. As Faulkner put it, Anderson's
			"was the fumbling for exactitude, the exact word and
			phrase within the limited scope of a vocabulary
			controlled and even repressed by what was in him almost
			a fetish of simplicity … to seek always to penetrate
			to thought's uttermost end." And in many younger
			writers who may not even be aware of the Anderson
			influence, you can see touches of his approach, echoes
			of his voice.</p>

			<p>Writing about the Elizabethan playwright John Ford, the
			poet Algernon Swinburne once said: "If he touches you
			once he takes you, and what he takes he keeps hold of;
			his work becomes part of your thought and parcel of
			your spiritual furniture forever." So it is, for me and
			many others, with Sherwood Anderson.</p>

			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature">Irving Howe</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
